
                               STOCK EXCHANGE AGREEMENT



THIS STOCK EXCHANGE AGREEMENT (this "Agreement") made this 29th day of
April, 1997, is by and between Matrix Telecom, Inc. ("Matrix") and AvTel
Communications, Inc.
("Avtel").

1.       STOCK EXCHANGE

         At Closing (as hereinafter defined), the stockholders of Matrix
         listed on Schedule I (the "Stockholders") will deliver to Avtel
         3,484,260 properly endorsed, unencumbered Matrix common shares
         (the "Stock"), representing 100% of the outstanding Matrix common
         stock, in exchange for 34,590,049 shares of common stock of Avtel
         (such numbers to be adjusted to give effect to the Merger and
         Reverse Stock Split (defined below)), which will not be registered
         under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.

2.       EXCHANGE STATEMENT

         Prior to the Closing, Matrix shall deliver to Avtel a duly
         executed EXCHANGE STATEMENT from each Stockholder in the form
         attached hereto as Exhibit A (each, an "Exchange Statement").

3.       MATRIX NON-QUALIFIED STOCK OPTIONS

         At Closing, Matrix will cancel all non-qualified stock options
         (covering 9,000 Matrix shares) that it has granted and that remain
         outstanding as of the date hereof, and Avtel will issue to the
         beneficiaries thereof, 89,348 Avtel non-qualified stock options
         (such numbers to be adjusted to give effect to the Merger and
         Reverse Stock Split (defined below)) having the same exercise
         period and exercise prices as currently apply to such Matrix
         options all as set forth on Schedule II.

4.       REGISTRATION RIGHTS AND LOCK-UP AGREEMENTS

         At Closing, Avtel and Matrix, on behalf of the Stockholders, shall
         enter into a REGISTRATION RIGHTS AND LOCK-UP AGREEMENT in the form
         set forth on Exhibit B.

5.       MATRIX OPERATIONS; INVESTMENT PURPOSES

         Avtel will own Matrix and operate its business in the ordinary
         course and has no intention of disposing of significant assets.



                                     1





6.       POOLING OF INTERESTS

         The parties intend that the transaction contemplated hereby will
         be treated as a pooling of interests and agree to abide by the
         restrictions contained in Accounting Series Release 135 ("ASR
         135"). In this connection, no Stockholder will be allowed to sell
         any Avtel shares prior to release of Avtel and Matrix combined
         earnings covering a period of combined earnings of not less than
         30 days in accordance with ASR 135.

7.       INCOME TAX TREATMENT

         The parties intend that the transaction will be treated as a
         tax-free reorganization under IRC Section 368(a)(1)(B) and will
         take no actions that will violate applicable requirements.

8.       AVTEL SHAREHOLDERS' MEETING

         Avtel shall, in accordance with applicable law, as soon as
         practicable:

                  (a)      duly call, give notice of, convene and hold a
                           special meeting of its stockholders (the
                           "Stockholders' Meeting") for the purpose of
                           considering and taking action upon this
                           Agreement;

                  (b)      subject to the fiduciary duties of the Board of
                           Directors of Avtel under applicable law, include
                           in a proxy statement (the "Proxy Statement") to
                           be distributed to its stockholders the
                           recommendation of the Board of Directors of
                           Avtel that the stockholders of Avtel vote in
                           favor of the approval and adoption of this
                           Agreement and the transactions contemplated
                           hereby;

                  (c)      provide Matrix with copies of the proposed Proxy
                           Statement and a reasonable opportunity to review
                           and comment upon such Proxy Statement before it
                           is mailed to Avtel's shareholders; and

                  (d)      use its best efforts to (i) obtain and furnish
                           the information required to be included by it in
                           the Proxy Statement and respond promptly to any
                           comments made by the Securities and Exchange
                           Commission with respect to the Proxy Statement
                           and any preliminary version thereof and cause
                           the Proxy Statement to be mailed to its
                           stockholders at the earliest practicable time
                           and (ii) obtain the necessary approvals by its
                           stockholders of this Agreement and the
                           transactions contemplated hereby.




                                     2





9.       AVTEL MERGER; REVERSE STOCK SPLIT

         (a)       Prior to the Closing hereunder, Avtel shall merge (the
                   "Merger") with and into a Delaware corporation,
                   whereupon the separate corporate existence of Avtel
                   shall cease and such Delaware corporation (hereinafter,
                   "Newco") shall continue as the surviving corporation.
                   The Merger shall have the effects set forth under the
                   laws of the State of Delaware. Without limiting the
                   generality of the foregoing, and subject thereto, all
                   the properties, rights, privileges, powers and
                   franchises of Avtel shall vest in Newco, and all debts,
                   liabilities and duties of Avtel shall become the debts,
                   liabilities and duties of Newco. The certificate of
                   incorporation and bylaws of Newco shall be the
                   certificate of incorporation and bylaws of the
                   pre-existing Delaware corporation, substantially in the
                   form agreed to prior to the Merger by Matrix and Avtel
                   and approved by the shareholders of Avtel at the
                   Stockholder's Meeting. Subject to clause (b) below, at
                   the effective time of the Merger, by virtue of the
                   Merger and without any action on the part of Avtel or
                   Newco or the stockholders of Avtel, each share of common
                   stock and preferred stock and each option of Avtel
                   issued and outstanding immediately prior to the
                   effective time of the Merger shall by virtue of the
                   Merger be canceled and extinguished and be converted
                   into the right to receive one share of the common stock
                   or preferred stock or an option to acquire one share of
                   common stock of Avtel, as applicable, of Newco.

         (b)       Subject to the approval of Avtel's stockholders at the
                   Stockholders' Meeting, prior to the Closing, Avtel shall
                   either (i) effect a reverse stock split pursuant to
                   which each share of Avtel common stock and preferred
                   stock and each option granted by Avtel to acquire Avtel
                   common stock shall be converted into the right to
                   receive such lesser amount of Avtel common stock,
                   preferred stock or an option to acquire a lesser amount
                   of Avtel common stock, as applicable, as Avtel and
                   Matrix shall agree or, (ii) reduce the number of common
                   stock, preferred stock or options to acquire Newco
                   common stock that will be issued to Avtel stockholders
                   in the Merger to such lesser number of shares of common
                   stock, preferred stock or options to acquire Newco
                   common stock as Avtel and Matrix shall agree (the
                   adjustment contemplated by clauses (i) or (ii) being
                   referred to herein as the "Reverse
                   Stock Split"). At such time as Avtel and Matrix shall
                   agree upon the details of the Reverse Stock Split, Avtel
                   and Matrix shall amend this Agreement to adjust the
                   number of shares of Avtel common stock issuable to the
                   stockholders of Matrix pursuant to this Section 1 and
                   the number of shares of Avtel common stock for
                   which Avtel is required to grant options to holders of
                   Matrix options pursuant to Section 3, in each case, in a
                   manner which is directly proportional to the
                   adjustments made to the Avtel common stock and options
                   to acquire Avtel common stock pursuant to the Reserve
                   Stock Split.






                                     3



10.      AVTEL TO SUPPLY INFORMATION

         Until the Closing Date (as hereinafter defined), Avtel shall give
         Matrix full access during normal business hours, without
         unreasonable interference with business operations, to all of its
         the facilities, properties, books, contracts, commitments and
         records and shall make its officers and employees available to
         Matrix, as Matrix shall from time to time reasonably request.
         Matrix and its representatives will be furnished all information
         concerning Avtel that Matrix reasonably requests.

  11.    MATRIX TO SUPPLY INFORMATION

         Until the Closing Date, Matrix shall give Avtel full access during
         normal business hours, without unreasonable interference with
         business operations, to all of its the facilities, properties,
         books, contracts, commitments and records and shall make its
         officers and employees available to Avtel, as Avtel shall from
         time to time reasonably request. Avtel and its representatives
         will be furnished all information concerning Matrix that Avtel
         reasonably requests. Matrix shall provide to Avtel such
         information as may be required by the Proxy Statement which
         information shall be true and accurate in all material respects.

12.      BRIDGE LOAN

         Matrix agrees that following the execution of this Agreement,
         Matrix will make a bridge loan available to Avtel in the maximum
         principal amount of $500,000 on the following terms:

                  (a)      Up to $250,000 may be drawn by Avtel any time
                           after the execution of this Agreement and prior
                           to the earlier to occur of (i) August 31, 1997
                           or (ii) the termination of this Agreement.

                  (b)      Up to an additional $250,000 may be drawn by
                           Avtel at any time on or after July 1, 1997 and
                           prior to the earlier to occur of (i) August 31,
                           1997 or (ii) the termination of this Agreement.

                  (c)      Disbursements shall be made on five days'
                           written notice to Matrix. No disbursements shall
                           be made after the termination of this Agreement.

                  (d)      The loan shall be recourse and shall bear
                           interest at the rate of 8% per annum through
                           August 31, 1997, and thereafter at a rate of 12%
                           until maturity and, after maturity at a rate of
                           15%, in all cases subject to reduction to comply
                           with applicable usury laws. Interest shall be
                           payable monthly in arrears, based on a 360-day
                           year, and all principal and accrued interest
                           shall be due and payable on or before the
                           earlier of (i) 180 days after the termination of
                           this Agreement or (ii) December 1, 1997.




                                     4





                  (e)      Avtel shall pay all expenses of documenting the
                           loan, including any necessary California usury
                           permit, if any.

13.      MATRIX REPRESENTATIONS

         Matrix represents to Avtel as follows:

         (a)      Schedule I is a complete and accurate list of all of the
                  shares of Matrix common stock owned by each of the
                  Stockholders. Schedule II is a complete and accurate list
                  of all Matrix options issued and outstanding.

         (b)      Matrix is a corporation duly organized, validly existing
                  and in good standing under the laws of the State of Texas
                  with all requisite corporate power and authority to own,
                  lease and operate its properties and to carry on its
                  business as now being conducted.

         (c)       Matrix has full power and authority to enter into this
                   Agreement and to carry out the transactions contemplated
                   hereby, and this Agreement has been duly and validly
                   executed and delivered by Matrix and constitutes the
                   legal, valid and binding obligation of Matrix,
                   enforceable in accordance with its terms. The execution,
                   delivery and performance of this Agreement and all other
                   transactions contemplated hereby will not cause any
                   material default or breach in any contract, loan
                   agreement or other instrument to which Matrix is a party
                   or violate any law or decree or judgment of any
                   government or governmental agency having jurisdiction
                   over Matrix.

         (d)      Matrix's authorized capital stock consists of 10,000,000
                  shares of common stock, no par value, of which 3,484,260
                  shares are issued and outstanding. Schedule II is a list
                  of all Matrix stock options existing as of the date
                  hereof together with a list of all stock options that
                  Matrix has agreed to issue but has not yet issued.

         (e)       The financial statements of Matrix listed on Schedule III
                   fairly present in all material respects Matrix's
                   financial position and assets and its results of
                   operation and changes in financial position with respect
                   to the respective dates thereof and the periods covered
                   thereby, in conformity with the United States generally
                   accepted accounting principles at the time in effect
                   ("GAAP"), and Matrix's past ---- accounting practices,
                   consistently applied during such periods, and such
                   financial statements, including the notes thereto, make
                   full and adequate disclosure of, and provision for, all
                   of Matrix's material obligations and liabilities as of
                   the date thereof, whether accrued, absolute, contingent
                   or otherwise, to the extent required by GAAP. Since the
                   date of the last of such financial statements, there
                   have been no material adverse changes to the business or
                   condition of Matrix that have not been disclosed to
                   Avtel.




                                     5





         (f)      Schedule IV contains a list of all material contracts
                  between Matrix and any of its officers, directors or
                  shareholders, true, correct and complete copies of which
                  have been furnished to Avtel.

         (g)      Schedule V contains a true, correct and complete list of
                  all of Matrix's employee benefit plans and a list of each
                  employee of Matrix as of the date hereof, his/her current
                  position, annual salary and current bonus entitlement.
 .
         (h)      Except as set forth in Schedule VI, Matrix is not a party
                  to and has not been threatened with any legal action,
                  governmental investigation or proceeding or any other
                  material claim or proceeding, including, without
                  limitation, any tax audit.

         (i)       Matrix has provided Avtel copies of the prior three
                   year's federal and state income tax returns and
                   represents that it believes such returns fairly reflect
                   Matrix's tax obligations for such periods and that no
                   adjustments for such periods have been proposed. All
                   federal, state, local and foreign tax returns required
                   to be filed by or with respect to Matrix through the
                   Closing Date have been or will be accurately prepared,
                   and have been or will be duly and timely filed, and all
                   taxes, interest, penalties, assessments and/or
                   deficiencies due with respect to any taxable period
                   ending on or before the Closing Date have been or will
                   be timely paid, or adequate provision for the payment
                   thereof has been or will be made on Matrix's financial
                   statements or books of account.

         (j)      Except as disclosed on Schedule VII, no notice to, filing
                  with, authorization of, exemption by, or consent of any
                  person, entity or public or governmental authority is
                  required in order for Matrix to consummate the
                  transactions contemplated hereby.

14.      AVTEL REPRESENTATIONS

         Avtel represents to Matrix as follows:

         (a)      Avtel is a corporation duly organized, validly existing
                  and in good standing under the laws of the State of Utah
                  with all requisite corporate power and authority to own,
                  lease and operate its properties and to carry on its
                  business as now being conducted.

         (b)      Avtel has full power and authority to enter into this
                  Agreement and to carry out the transactions contemplated
                  hereby, and this Agreement has been duly and validly
                  executed and delivered by Avtel, and constitutes the
                  legal, valid and binding obligation of Avtel, enforceable
                  in accordance with its terms. The execution, delivery and
                  performance of this Agreement and all other transactions
                  contemplated hereby will not cause any material default
                  or breach in any contract, loan agreement or other
                  instrument to which Avtel is a party or violate any law
                  or


                                     6





                  decree or judgement of any government or governmental agency
                  having jurisdiction over Avtel.

         (c)      Avtel's authorized capital stock consists of 50,000,000
                   shares of common stock, $.001 par value, per share, of
                   which 7,135,807 shares are issued and outstanding and
                   5,000,000 shares of preferred stock of which 1,000,000
                   shares designated, $1.00 par value Series A Convertible
                   Preferred Stock are issued and outstanding. All such
                   shares were held as of April 9, 1997 as set forth on
                   Schedule VIII. All of the issued shares of
                   the capital stock of Avtel have been duly and validly
                   authorized and issued, are fully paid and
                   non-assessable. The shares of common stock to be
                   delivered by Avtel to the Stockholders pursuant to this
                   Agreement have been duly and validly authorized and,
                   when issued and delivered as provided herein, will be
                   duly and validly issued and fully paid and
                   non-assessable. Schedule IX is a list of all Avtel stock
                   options existing as of the date hereof, together with a list
                   of all stock options Avtel has agreed to issue but has not
                   yet issued, and Avtel has not entered into any agreement to
                   issue additional stock options except as disclosed on
                   Schedule IX.

         (d)       The financial statements of Avtel listed on Schedule X
                   fairly present in all material respects Avtel's
                   financial position and assets and its results of
                   operation and changes in financial position with respect
                   to the respective dates thereof and the periods covered
                   thereby, in conformity with GAAP and Avtel's past
                   accounting practices, consistently applied during such
                   periods, and such financial statements, including the
                   notes thereto, make full and adequate disclosure of, and
                   provision for, all of Avtel's material obligations and
                   liabilities as of the date thereof, whether accrued,
                   absolute, contingent or otherwise, to the extent
                   required by GAAP. Since the date of the last of such
                   financial statements, there have been no material
                   adverse changes to the business or condition of Avtel
                   that have not been disclosed to Matrix.

         (e)      Schedule XI contains a list of all material contracts
                  between Avtel and any of its officers, directors or
                  shareholders, true, correct and complete copies of which
                  have been furnished to Matrix.

         (f)      Schedule XII contains a true, correct and complete list
                  of all of Avtel's employee benefit plans and a list of
                  each employee of Avtel and its subsidiaries as of the
                  date hereof, his/her current position, annual salary (and
                  proposed adjustments thereto for the next 6 months) and
                  current bonus entitlement.
 .
         (g)      Except as set forth in Schedule XIII, Avtel is not a
                  party to and has not been threatened with any legal
                  action, governmental investigation or proceeding or any
                  other material claim or proceeding, including, without
                  limitation, any tax audit.



                                                         7





         (h)       Avtel has provided Matrix copies of the prior three
                   year's federal and state income tax returns and
                   represents that it believes such returns fairly reflect
                   Avtel's tax obligations for such periods and that no
                   adjustments for such periods have been proposed. All
                   federal, state, local and foreign tax returns required
                   to be filed by or with respect to Avtel from January 1,
                   1993 through the Closing Date have been or will be
                   accurately prepared, and have been or will be duly and
                   timely filed, and all taxes, interest, penalties,
                   assessments and/or deficiencies due with respect to any
                   taxable period ending on or before the Closing Date have
                   been or will be timely paid, or adequate provision for
                   the payment thereof has been or will be made on Avtel's
                   financial statements or books of account.

         (i)      Except as disclosed on Schedule XIV, no notice to, filing
                  with, authorization of, exemption by, or consent of any
                  person, entity or public or governmental authority is
                  required in order for Avtel to consummate the
                  transactions contemplated hereby.

15.      CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO OBLIGATIONS OF MATRIX

         (a)      Avtel's representations and warranties contained herein
                  shall be true in all material respects on and as of the
                  date of this Agreement and shall also be true in all
                  material respects (except for such changes as are
                  contemplated by the terms of this Agreement) on and as of
                  the Closing Date with the same force and effect as though
                  made by Avtel on and as of the Closing Date.

         (b)      Avtel shall, in all material respects, have performed all
                  obligations and agreements and complied with all
                  covenants contained in this Agreement, to be performed
                  and complied with by it on or prior to the Closing Date;
                  and Avtel shall have delivered to Matrix a certificate,
                  dated as of the Closing Date, certifying as to its
                  compliance with Section 15(a) and Section 15(b).

         (c)      The Registration Rights Agreement shall have been
                  executed by the Avtel and delivered to Matrix.

         (d)      The shareholders of Avtel shall have approved this
                  Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby.

         (e)      Any and all governmental and other consents required in
                  connection with this Agreement shall have been obtained.

         (f) Each Stockholder shall have executed an Exchange Statement.




                                     8





16.      CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO OBLIGATIONS OF AVTEL

         (a)      Matrix's representations and warranties contained herein
                  shall be true in all material respects on and as of the
                  date of this Agreement and shall also be true in all
                  material respects (except for such changes as are
                  contemplated by the terms of this Agreement) on and as of
                  the Closing Date with the same force and effect as though
                  made by Matrix on and as of the Closing Date.

         (b)      Matrix shall, in all material respects, have performed
                  all obligations and agreements and complied with all
                  covenants contained in this Agreement to be performed and
                  complied with by it on or prior to the Closing Date and
                  Matrix shall have delivered to Avtel a certificate, dated
                  as of the Closing Date, certifying as to its compliance
                  with Section 16(a) and Section 16(b).

         (c)      The Registration Rights Agreement shall have been
                  executed by Matrix and the Exchange Statements shall have
                  ben executed by the Stockholders and such documents shall
                  have been delivered to Avtel.

         (d)      The shareholders of Avtel shall have approved this
                  Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby.

         (e)      Any and all governmental consents required in connection
                  with this Agreement shall have been obtained.

17.      CLOSING

         The Closing (the "Closing") shall take place at such place as
         Matrix and Avtel shall agree on the date that is three business
         days after the conditions referred to in clauses (d) and (e) of
         paragraphs 15 and 16 shall have been obtained or on such later
         date to which the parties hereto otherwise shall agree (such date
         being the "Closing Date").

18.      SURVIVAL

         The covenants, agreements, representations or warranties of the
         parties hereto contained in this Agreement or in any certificate
         or other writing delivered pursuant to, or in connection with,
         this Agreement shall survive one year from the Closing Date.

19.      TERMINATION

         This Agreement may be terminated at any time on or prior to the
         Closing Date:(i) with the mutual consent of Avtel and Matrix or
         (ii) by Avtel or Matrix, if the Closing shall not have taken place
         on or before July 1, 1997, or such later date as may be mutually
         approved in writing by Avtel or Matrix. This Agreement shall
         terminate automatically if


                                     9







                   the shareholders of Avtel do not approve this Agreement
                   or any of the transactions contemplated hereby.

20.      MISCELLANEOUS

         (a)      This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the State
                  of Texas, without regard to the conflict of law rules of
                  such state.

         (b)      This Agreement may be amended, modified or supplemented
                  but only in writing signed by all of the parties hereto.

         (c)      All notices, requests, demands and other communications
                  required or permitted hereunder shall be in writing and
                  shall be deemed to have been duly given when delivered by
                  hand, or by confirmed facsimile transmission, or on two
                  business days following delivery to a commercial
                  overnight air courier service, or five days after being
                  mailed, first class postage prepaid, return receipt
                  requested.

                  If to Matrix, addressed as follows:

                  0000 Xxxxx X'Xxxxxx Xxxx.
                  Xxxxx 000
                  Xxxxxx, Xxxxx 00000
                  Attention: Xxxxxx X. Xxxxxx
                  Facsimile:  (000) 000-0000

                  with a copy to:

                  Xxxxx, Xxxxx & Xxxxx
                  000 Xxxxx XxXxxxx Xxxxxx
                  Xxxxxxx, Xxxxxxxx 00000
                  Attention: Xxxxx X. Xxxxxxxxx
                  Facsimile:  (000) 000-0000



                                     10







                  If to Avtel, addressed as follows:

                  000 Xxxxxxx Xxxxx, Xxxxx X
                  Xxxxx Xxxxxxx, Xxxxxxxxxx 00000
                  Attention: Xxxxxxx Xxxx
                  Facsimile:  (000) 000-0000

                  with a copy to:

                  Price, Xxxxxx & Parma LLP
                  000 X. Xxxxxxxx Xxxxxx, Xxxxx 000
                  Xxxxx Xxxxxxx, Xxxxxxxxxx 00000
                  Attention:  Xxxxxxx XxXxxxx
                  Facsimile:  (000) 000-0000

                  or to such other individual or address as a party hereto
                  may designate for itself by notice given as herein
                  provided.

         (d)       The failure of a party hereto at any time or times to
                   require performance of any provision hereof shall in no
                   manner affect its right at a later time to enforce the
                   same. No waiver by a party of any condition or of any
                   breach of any term, covenant, representation or warranty
                   contained in this Agreement shall be effective unless in
                   writing, and no waiver in any one or more instances
                   shall be deemed to be a further or continuing waiver of
                   any such condition or breach in other instances or a
                   waiver of any other condition or breach of any other
                   term, covenant, representation or warranty.

         (e)      This Agreement may be executed simultaneously in
                  counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original,
                  but all of which together shall constitute one and the
                  same instrument.

         (f)      The Stockholders shall be deemed to be third party
                  beneficiaries of the rights of Matrix hereunder.



                                     11





         IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement
to be executed on the date first above written by their duly authorized
representatives.


MATRIX TELECOM, INC.                          AVTEL COMMUNICATIONS, INC.


By:_____________________________              By:_____________________________


--------------------------------               -------------------------------
         (Print Name)                                    (Print Name)

Its:_____________________________              Its:____________________________
           (duly authorized)                             (duly authorized)








                                     12